This folder contains a modified form of release 32V0 of the original (Shuttle era) HAL/S compiler (HAL/S-FC).  The modifications are intended not to affect functionality in any way, but instead to address certain changes to the commonly-available computing environments which have occurred over the course of decades as well as to address corruption of the encoding of the source code that occurred prior to my involvement.  The issues addressed are these:

* The files, originally encoded in EBCDIC, are here encoded in 7-bit ASCII.  *Note:* Most of this conversion occurred before I ever received this source code.  I cannot speak to when, why, or by whom it was done.  I *presume* that the conversion was performed for the sake of readability on modern platforms rather than because the compiler in use suddenly began accepting ASCII(ish) code.  Of course, my presumption may be wrong, but the point is that there is no reason to believe that this ASCII form of the code ever had been correctly compiled or even that it *could* have been compiled by the Shuttle-era development software.
* As presented to me in the form of pseudo-ASCII files, there are nevertheless many illegalities and inconsistencies: i.e., there are many characters not meaningful in a 7-bit ASCII representation, or which are legal ASCII but are obviously wrong.  In other words, these characters (as I received the files) were instead encoded idiosyncratically rather than using any univerally-accepted encoding or translation.  I've converted them to 7-bit ASCII or otherwise corrected them by using some consistent substitutions.  All ASCII characters used as substitutes do not appear otherwise in the received files, and are therefore not susceptible to misinterpretation.  The offending characters and substitutions are these:
    * "&not;" (logical-NOT), for which I have substituted ASCII "~". Some of the files I received already used the undocumented replacement of "~" *or* "^" for "&not;".  I have left "^" in place, since it is legal ASCII, but it is perhaps worth noting that the modern HAL/S compiler transparently converts it to a "~" internally.
    * "&cent;" (U.S. cent), for which I have substituted ASCII "`".
    * An "end-of-file" character (which has neither an EBCDIC nor ASCII equivalent), for which I have substituted ASCII "\".
    * The unprintable `NUL` (numerically, 00), for which I have substituted an ASCII space (" ").
    * Lower-case "i" (the entirety of the code base otherwise being upper case) and unprintable control characters, which I have deleted.  
* As presented to me, none of the source-code files have extensions to their filenames that can be used to determine the programming languages used.  While I'm no great fan of filename extensions, I feel that they serve a useful purpose in documenting computer source code, and they enable presentation software (including GitHub's) to apply appropriate syntax highlighting (if defined).  I have therefore added filename extensions as follows:
    * XPL files:  .xpl
    * IBM 360 Basic Assembly Language files:  .bal
    * IBM AP-101S assembly-language files:  .asm
    * Compiler reports:  .txt
* Finally, headers in the form of comment blocks have been added to the tops of many source-code files.  These are in the form of legal XPL, BAL, or ASM comments, and thus do not affect the compiled or assembled forms *functionally*, though they would have the effect of altering line-numbering in listings or error messages produced by compilers or assemblers.  These "modern comments" are usually distinguishable from the contemporary comments in that they obey the following convention:
    * "/&#42;@" is used as the opening of an inline comment in XPL.  Contemporary comments would simply be "/&#42;" without the trailing "@".
    * "&#42;/" is used as the prefix for a comment in BAL or AP-101S assembly language.  Contemporary comments wouldn't usually have the trailing "/".

An important factor in justifying the non-ASCII or wrong-ASCII substitutions, beyond the perhaps-significant fact that they allow the code to compile with modern compilers rather than remaining chock-full of compile-time errors, is that the source code has a consistent line length of 80 characters (plus line numbers in some cases), consistent with being sourced via computer punch-cards; for this reason, it is very obvious which problematic characters need to be deleted entirely vs being replaced by (say) space characters.

Other than the compiler reports and the XPL, BAL, and ASM source-code files mentioned above, there are JCL and CLIST files, and possibly other non-source-code types I don't recognize.  I have made no attempt whatever to alter any of their filenames or to append comments to them.

Finally, it perhaps goes without saying, but all of these alterations mean that if an IBM 360 computer equipped with the original Intermetrics XPL and HAL/S compilers magically appeared from nowhere, it could not actually compile the HAL/S-FC code or Space Shuttle flight software as it is presented here, which would instead have to be converted to EBCDIC first.  IBM 360 emulation software as presented elsewhere in the Virtual AGC source tree (see XCOM-I/sim360-source/simulate/) does have the capability of performing such translations, however.

