This folder contains various types of non-ITAR-restricted source code in languages like XPL, HAL/S, and BAL (for IBM System/360 mainframe or AP-101S GPC).  In particular, it contains no flight software.  Here's what it does contain:

* Folder "HAL-S-360 Users Manual":  Contains some HAL/S software transcribed as-is from [the "HAL/S-360 User's Manual" document, IR-58-5](https://www.ibiblio.org/apollo/Shuttle/19740017615.pdf).  It is intended for testing of the original or modern HAL/S compiler.
* Folder "PASS.REL32V0":  Contains the XPL and BAL source code of the original (Shuttle era) HAL/S compiler (HAL/S-FC).  See the README file within that folder itself.
* Folder "Programming in HAL-S":  Contains a lot of HAL/S software adapted from [the document "Programming in HAL/S"](https://www.ibiblio.org/apollo/Shuttle/Programming%20in%20HAL_S%20Sept%201978.pdf).  The document provided this code as known-correct examples of how to write HAL/S code exercising various HAL/S language features.  Here it is instead intended to help validate correct operation of the modern HAL/S compiler and emulator.  Since the original code often did not provide any way to help with the latter, many of the code samples here have been adapted (sometimes extensively) to include user interfaces providing evidence of correct operation.
* Folder "XPL-TWS-1969-03":  Contains the XPL code that was the basis for the original (Shuttle era) XPL compiler.  To be clear, this is *not* the original XPL compiler used in Shuttle software development, because the Shuttle developers used a modified form of the XPL compiler.  It is thus posted here more for informational purposes rather than because it has any specific utility.  Even assuming it were an executable, it could not, for example, be used to compile the original code for the HAL/S compiler.  I expect (hope?) the source code for the original XPL compiler to be posted separately.  See the README within the folder for more details.

