This directory contains ~30 short XPL/I programs for testing various aspects of SDFPKG and its integration into XPL/I.  In most cases those programs are accompanied by the reports generated by those test programs as well.  In some cases, there are actually _two_ reports which differ slightly, and I have no explanation for that except that perhaps there were two versions of those test programs, of which only one of the versions has survived.

There is also one case, namely SDF4013 in which there are indeed two versions of the test program, namely SDF4013 and SDF4013A, of which we have only on report.  That report was originally associated only with SDF4013A, and I've arbitrarily associated it with SDF4013 as well, which may turn out to be an error on my part.

There are a few cases (SDFPKG.xpl, SDF4015.xpl, SDF4009.xpl) in which we have the test program but no copy of the test report with which it can be compared.  Well, too bad!

A worse problem is that we don't have the SDF's which these test programs are supposed to read, except for the exceptional case of MARIO.xpl, for which we have the HAL/S source code that can be compiled to form the SDF.

As far as the missing SDF's are concerned, 22 of them relate to an SDF called ##COPY1A, but there are various others as well, among them ##COPY2A, ##CASR, ##CR3079, ##COPY99, ##CDLANN, and ##GDJAMI.  At least some of these correspond (name-wise, at any rate) to HAL/S files in PASS source code, such as:

  * SSSRC/CDLANNUN.hal
  * APPLSRC/GDJAMI.hal

Regarding the tests being performed, the program comments often aren't very forthcoming as to the exact purposes of the tests.  Here's what I gather so far:

  * CR13079.xpl:  CR13079 added HAL/S initialization data to the SDF, and that seems to be the basis of the name, though the internal comments state that it's also for testing SDFPKG mode 18, which is seemingly unrelated as far as documentation is concerned.  The available documentation for mode 18, namely document SFOC-PASS0092, precedes the implementation of CR13079 (albeit just by a few months), so it's possible that the documentation is out of date as to the nature of mode 18.
  * DR109430.xpl:  Seems to be a test related to a documentation change related to problems when multiple SDF's are open simultaneously.  Alas, there is no available information about the nature of the problem.
  * MON22.xpl, MON22A.xpl, MON22B.xpl, MON22C.xpl:  General tests of `MONITOR(22)`, which is the wrapper function used in XPL/I for calling SDFPKG.
  * SDF.xpl:  TBD.
  * SDF40<i>NN</i>.xpl:  SDFPKG abends on various conditions, with abend codes 4001 through 4023, so the tests with names like SDF40<i>NN</i>.xpl seem to be tests intended to reproduce or avoid reproducing those error conditions.
  * SDFPKG.xpl:  TBD

